USHIRIKA WELFARE ORGANIZATION
BYLAWS

Article 1. MEMBERSHIP: NEW MEMBER ENROLMENT

i. A prospective member can be introduced by any current member.
ii. The member must be at least 18 years of age and reside within the State of Texas. Grandfathered members who moved out of state will be exempt.
iii. You must either be of Luhya descent or married to someone of Luhya descent
iv. The existing member will then inform an executive member to call the prospective member, giving them their telephone number and email address.
v. A member of the leadership (preferably from constitution/compliance) will call the joining member, give them a copy of our constitution and bylaws, and inform them to go through the document and expect a call from leadership.
vi. After a second successful meeting with the leadership, the joining member will be requested to fill in a membership form and send in their membership fee.
vii. The new member will be introduced to the existing UWO members and placed on a 6-month probationary period. After completing the probationary period, the new member will be eligible to receive the full benefits of UWO membership.
viii. During the probation period any existing member who has any reason why the new member shouldn't join UWO shall send their objection in writing to The Secretary. The objection shall be handled by a committee of leadership plus 3 other ordinary members selected by the general membership. This should be concluded before the next quarterly general meeting.
ix. If the new member is involved in any misconduct during probation, they will not be confirmed and will be refunded the membership fees.
x. The recruitment period shall be open year-round to eligible members who meet and comply with all rules governing UWO.
Article 2. EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

There shall be an executive committee consisting of all elected officials. The committee will be tasked with the following mandate.
i. Approve appointments, events, and budgets.
ii. Approve disbursement of funds
iii. Provide oversight to the Subcommittees.
iv. Provide long-range planning and set goals for the Organization.
v. Organize and prepare events and budgets.
vi. Make binding decisions on issues that require urgent resolution.
CHAIRPERSON

i. Preside all meetings.
ii. Signatory to the bank accounts and any other area requiring such signing.
iii. Organization's spokesperson.
iv. Perform other duties as may be directed by the various committees and ratified by the members.
v. Develops Agenda and plans meetings in the Organization with the Executive and Management Committee
vi. Approves official communications.
vii. Chair the executive & Management committee meetings.
viii. Preside over affairs of the Organization.
ix. Ensure that decisions taken by the Executive and Management committees are executed.
x. Ensure that the Organization adheres to constitutional policies and that the Organization lives up to its mission statement.
xi. Ensure that the Organization stays aligned to the vision and mission as stipulated in the Constitution.
xii. Chair annual general meetings, quarterly meetings, and any other Organization's meetings
VICE-CHAIRPERSON

i. Assume responsibilities of the Chairperson as needed in the absence of the Chair.
ii. Consult and advise all appointed committee members.
iii. Consult and advise the Chairperson on organizational matters
SECRETARY

i. The chief custodian of the UWO official documents
ii. Prepare and organize all the Organization's documentation and files and keep safe all the Organization's mail and correspondence.
iii. Send all correspondence to the members and maintain the current register of all members.
iv. Post the minutes of the previous meeting two weeks before the next meeting to the group WhatsApp chat and member emails, and/or print and distribute hard copies of the previous minutes to members before the start of the next meeting.
v. Act as a custodian of all communication from the Organization
vi. Distribute scheduling information for meetings and other activities.
vii. Official communicator and correspondent of the Organization.
viii. Record and keep accurate minutes of any meetings.
ix. Write and or distribute all notifications of the members.
x. Prepare annual reports in coordination with the Treasury.
xi. Maintain accurate time keeping and complete list of members present and absent in any meeting in coordination with the Chief Whip
xii. Any official communication to The Secretary shall be via email or regular mail
ASSISTANT SECRETARY

i. The principal assist to the secretary
TREASURER

i. Mandatory signatory to all bank accounts
ii. General management of the financial affairs of the organization in a competent and efficient manner
iii. To ensure the safe keeping of the Organization's money, securities, and books of account
iv. To ensure that all payments and expenditures are duly authorized.
v. To ensure compliance with all financial directives of the management committee.
vi. To prepare and submit to the members a financial statement showing the condition of the Organization at the end of each quarter, with emphasis on details of receipts and expenditures with the bank balance
vii. Guardian of UWO bank accounts
viii. Submit UWO financial Books for Audit to both internal and External Auditors
ix. Chair the finance committee and coordinate the preparation of financial statements for the organization.
x. Handle and oversee tax-related affairs and maintain the organization's nonprofit status
xi. Custodian of all current financial documents
xii. Accepts payments from members
xiii. Tracks all deposits, withdrawals, expenses, and other financial dealings
ASSISTANT TREASURER

Deputies the Treasurer
CHIEF WHIP

The Chief Whip shall serve as a liaison between the leadership and members, fostering unity and discipline and facilitating collective action to achieve the goals and objectives of the Ushirika organization.
i. Enforce the Organization's rules and regulations.
ii. Publicity on the Organization's behalf under the management committee's general supervision.
iii. Organize the meetings by making all logistics of hosting such meetings.
iv. Will maintain discipline in the meeting and call attention to the indiscipline cases.
v. To prepare the ballot papers when the need for voting arises
vi. Master of Ceremony in Official events of the Organization
vii. Oversee the planning and organization of all approved Organization's events phases.
viii. Research markets to identify opportunities for events.
ix. Liaise with vendors to ascertain the precise requirements for events.
x. Advises the executive committee on proposals for events which include:
a. Timelines
b. Venues
c. Suppliers
d. Staffing
xi. Coordinate venue management, caterers, and contractors
xii. Oversee the setup and cleanup of the event venues.
xiii. Provide post-events evaluation that includes data entry and analysis.
xiv. Produce reports for events stakeholders.
xv. Custodian of all and any items belonging to the Organization that pertain to events.
xvi. Liaise with the Secretary and the President to send out reminders for events and meetings.
xvii. Mobilize the organization for recruitment and sustenance of membership.
xviii. In consultation with the President and the Secretary, be the organization's official spokesperson.
COMPLIANCE OFFICER

Functions of Compliance
1. Financial Audits: Examining financial statements and records to ensure accuracy and compliance with the laws and regulations
2. Performance Audits: Evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of programs, operations, and services.
3. Compliance Audits: Assessing adherence to laws, regulations, and policies.
4. Special Audits: Conducting investigations into specific allegations or concerns.
5. Reporting: Issuing findings and recommendations to improve governance, management, and Accountability.
6. Shall serve as the returning officer during elections.
IMPEACHMENT OF EXECUTIVE MEMBER

i. Executive committee members may be impeached for not fulfilling the organization's purposes and policies as outlined in the Constitution and Bylaws or for violating UWO's financial handling.
ii. Any organization member may initiate impeachment proceedings by giving written notice to the Secretary. If the Secretary is being impeached, notice should be given to the Chairperson.
iii. Upon formal notification, it is the responsibility of the Chairperson (or Vice-Chairperson), in consultation and approval of the executive committee, to convene an ad hoc committee of inquiry made up of two (2) members of the executive committee and three (3) members selected by the general membership to consider the filed allegations.
iv. Any impeached individual shall be given full notice of the allegations against him/her and shall have an opportunity to respond to them.
v. The ad-hoc committee of inquiry will investigate the allegations, determine the validity of the charges, and recommend sanctioning to the full body for its consideration.
vi. To be implemented, the ad hoc committee of inquiry's recommendations for sanctioning must be approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members present and voting.
vii. The Chairperson shall call a special meeting to discuss the findings.
viii. An appeal may be requested only based on one of the following two claims.
i. That there was a procedural error in the conduct of the Impeachment proceedings.
ii. That there is significant new evidence that was previously not available. If the impeachment allegation was found to be malicious, the executive committee may penalize the person presenting the allegations.
Article 3. CODE OF CONDUCT

i. All Ushirika Welfare Organization (UWO) members shall ascribe to and uphold the code of conduct.
ii. Any member who defrauds the organization through mischief or misrepresentation of facts will be subjected to expulsion and legal redress.
iii. All members of Ushirika Welfare Organization (UWO) shall treat other UWO members, affiliates, or volunteers of UWO with respect.
iv. Members may not conduct themselves in a manner that is endangering the life, safety, health, or well-being of others during affiliated UWO events or meetings.
v. Members Should comply with Ushirika code of conduct and adhere to privacy & confidentiality.
vi. The Executive Committee will:
a. Provide credible and effective oversight to the organization's work without personal bias.
b. Comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws & regulations and fiduciary.
vii. The said code of conduct may be amended from time to time by resolution of an Annual General Meeting or Special Meetings of the Ushirika Welfare Organization (UWO), which shall be passed by simple majority of the full members present.
viii. No member or office bearer or representative of this organization shall take any action or carry any activity by or on behalf of the organization not permitted to be taken or carried out.
ix. UWO members shall not use their position or influence to advance political ambitions or interests.
Article 4. ELECTIONS

i. The group elections shall be held every 2 years. The election shall be by secret ballot.
ii. Compliance officer shall hold office for 3 years
iii. The compliance officer shall act as the returning officer. During elections of the Compliance officer, the Chief Whip shall act as the returning officer
iv. Members will nominate themselves or other members of the Organization for election no less than 60 days before the AGM when elections are held. The executive committee will vet the nominees, and the Secretary shall communicate the names of the qualified candidates to members no later than 30 days before AGM.
v. Potential candidate must have been a member of UWO and The Benevolence fund for a minimum of 1 year and not fallen out of good standing at any one time during that period before elections.
vi. Elected officials shall take office with immediate effect.
vii. Outgoing officials must hand over office no later than 30 days after elections
viii. The majority of members in office immediately before an AGM shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at that meeting. The executive committee shall consider no business at any meeting in which a quorum is not present.
ix. Notice of Election: Announcement of the election, including the positions to be filled, eligibility criteria, and nomination procedures, shall be made by the secretary 90 days before the election date.
x. Nomination Period: Members and/or contestants shall submit nominations in writing within the specified timeframe.
xi. Campaign Period: Candidates may campaign by addressing members to promote their candidacy.
xii. Voting: Members may vote either in person OR Through their appointed proxy.
xiii. Elections shall be conducted manually and/or electronically
xiv. Member has to be of good standing (All dues payable to UWO paid) to be eligible to vote.
xv. Voting Deadline: Voting may start 15 days from the election day; all votes must be cast by noon on election day.
xvi. Counting and Tabulation: This will be performed by the designated returning officer on the election date
xvii. The returning officer shall announce the Election Results.
xviii. Inauguration/Induction: Newly elected officials take office, and outgoing officials transfer their responsibilities within 30 days of an election
Article 5. BENEVOLENCE

i. The benevolence coordinator will be APPOINTED by the executive and will hold office for 2 terms (4 calendar years)
ii. A Committee established under the bylaws of the UWO to support members who belong to the committee financially in time of bereavement of NAMED beloved relatives.
iii. There shall be three (3) decision-making members of this committee elected by the members belonging to the committee who shall hold office for 2 years. Made up of the coordinator, Chairperson & Treasury
iv. Benevolent membership is voluntary and achieved through an agreed upon membership contribution amount. The amount agreed upon at the writing of this document is $600.
v. Upon completion of the $600 payment, the member will be on probation for 6 months, during which time they will be ineligible for benefits and exempted from any replenishment activities.
vi. The Replenishment Amount is $100 at the passing of these Bylaws.
vii. The membership contribution is Non-Refundable. The exception is if a member withdraws from the group without having received any benefits from the committee.
viii. Upon Joining Benevolence, every member nominates six (6) beneficiaries for whom the member is to be supported in case of their loss. The list is not interchangeable except under special election circumstances such as marriage, divorce, birth/ adoption
ix. No two members shall have the same beneficiaries to avoid duplication of support. (Exception is made for members that had nominated the same beneficiary at the time of the Special Benevolent meeting in 2022)
x. A member that lists another member as a beneficiary shall only receive funds from the general membership fund under section xi
xi. $200 Shall be contributed by each organization member should a member pass on. This amount will be given to the member's next of kin and/or facilitate the funeral and repatriation of the body as may apply. In the demise of a member, the President will announce to the members within 24 hours of notification, and he/she will appoint a committee to coordinate the process of assisting the next of kin and/or collection of funds.
Steps to be followed to file a claim. Notify the benevolence coordinator within 24 hours after the death of the member's beneficiary. The benevolence coordinator will notify the benevolence committee who will verify the claim's validity. The coordinator will notify the members of the occurrence. The treasurer will disburse the funds either electronically or by check within 24 hours or at the bereaved members' discretion. Benevolence members will replenish $100 toward the benevolence deposit fund within 2/4 weeks from the funds being disbursed to the bereaved member. Failure to replenish the $100 within the 2/4 weeks' deadline will result in ineligibility for the members' benefits, and when funds are replenished, a member shall be on probation for 2 weeks.
Article 6. MEETINGS

1. Annual general meeting (AGM)
2. Quarterly general meeting (QGM)
3. Special general meeting (SGM)
Steps to follow in general meetings:
- Prayers
- Reading and confirmation of previous minutes
- Introduction of new members
- Matters arising
- Report from All committees
- AOB
4. Committee mettings.
5. Leadership meetings.
Article 7. ATTENDANCE

I. Fines shall be imposed to any member who arrives after the established meeting starting time.
II. Tardy fines are subject to revisions based on UWO member's decisions.
III. Members are allowed to miss one of the four QMs with no penalties. The following penalties will be imposed on missing any of the other meetings: Notice of absence should be forwarded to the secretary not less than 24 hours before the start of the meeting by filling out and submitting the proxy form.
IV. Exceptions will be made in case of critical illness or military deployment.
V. No intoxication before the end of the formal session of the meeting shall be entertained.
VI. Tardy Fines :
a. Tardy fines include $20 up to 30min late and $30 thereafter.
b. Absence with an excuse and proxy penalty is $30
c. Any absence without the notice, penalty is $35
