USHIRIKA WELFARE ORGANIZATION
CONSTITUTION

Article I. NAME AND PURPOSE

Section A. NAME

1. The official name of the Organization shall be USHIRIKA WELFARE ORGANIZATION.
2. This organization will use its official name or its acronym, "UWO," hereinafter in this constitution referred to as "the Organization."
Section B. PURPOSE

1. Create and coordinate welfare programs for its members during bereavement, special events, and/or other circumstances.
2. Establish a Benevolent Fund to assist and support members during bereavement as defined in Article 5 of the Ushirika bylaws.
3. Develop and implement community-based programs.
4. Help keep alive (Promote) African Culture, Heritage, and Languages.
Note: UWO is organized and operated exclusively for exempt purposes outlined in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Article II. REGISTERED OFFICE

The Business address of the Organization shall be at 6702 AMBERCREST DRIVE, ARLINGTON TEXAS 76002.
Article III. MEMBERSHIP

Section A. REQUIREMENTS

1. Membership of the Organization shall be open to all individuals (over the age of 18) who support the purpose of the Organization, following our bylaws Article 1 section 1.
2. Member will be required to:
a. Reside in Dallas Forth Worth (DFW) Texas Metroplex (see Article I,B,2 for exemption.
b. Kenyan
c. Luhyas or have ties to the Luhya community.
3. Pay a Non-Refundable REGISTRATION fee.
4. Members may be required to pay a monthly contribution determined by the members.
Section B. OBLIGATIONS

1. All members must abide by the Organization's rules, regulations, and code of conduct.
2. Members will be required to participate in the Organization's activities respectfully and responsibly and report any misconduct that affects the organization's operations and stability.
3. Members can vote in our annual general meeting, hold office, and attend meetings.
4. Membership fees are non-transferable and non-refundable.
5. Members will be required to pay their dues as stipulated by the Organization.
6. All members shall contribute $200 if any full member of the organization passes away. If the deceased member was still on probation all UWO membership will be called upon to decide how much every member should contribute.
Section C. TERMINATION

1. Membership may be terminated by.
a. Resignation
b. Expulsion
c. Failure to pay dues as determined by the organization.
d. Failure to attend any one of the four quarterly and/or annual meetings and participate in organization activities for 12 months.
2. For member expulsion, a vote of two-thirds of members present at any meeting will be required.
3. Any member may be expelled from the Organization when the Committee so recommends and when a general meeting of the Organization shall resolve by a simple majority of members present that such a member should be expelled on the grounds of failure to at his/her conduct has adversely affected the reputation or dignity of the Organization, or that he or she has contravened any of the provisions of the constitution of the Organization.
4. A member whose expulsion is proposed shall have the right to address the general meeting at which his/her expulsion is to be considered.
5. Failure to attend three consecutive meetings without a valid reason shall give the members powers to expel such a member, and clause vii of article 4 shall apply.
Article IV. LEADERSHIP

Section A. APPOINTMENT

The Association shall have the leaders elected in an ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING to a two (2) year term. After the term ends, leaders will be subject to election annually to continue their positions. The following office holders shall be elected and shall be gender sensitive ENSURING A RATIO 1:1
Section B. REQUIREMENTS FOR RUNNING FOR AND HOLDING OFFICE

1. A member can only hold an electable position after being a UWO member for at least 12 months.
2. Must be a member of benevolence.
3. Must be in good standing (all dues payable to UWO paid).
Section C. OFFICER TITLES

The following positions will be electable and form the UWO executive.
- Chairperson The head of the executive committee will head all meetings, preside over all meetings, and sign the books of accounts, among other duties as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
- Vice Chairperson The Vice Chairperson will assume the Chairperson's responsibilities in his/her absence, among other duties, as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
- Treasurer General management of the organization's financial affairs in a competent and efficient manner, among other duties, as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
- Secretary Prepare and organize all the Organization's documentation and files, keep safe all the Organization's emails and correspondence, send all correspondence to the members, and maintain a current register of all members, among other duties as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
- Assistant Secretary Will assume responsibilities of the Secretary in his/her absence, among other duties as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
- Chief Whip The executive spokesperson will Enforce the Organization's rules and regulations, among other duties, as defined in Article 2 of the Ushirika Bylaws.
RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES

Any disputes arising in the Organization shall be referred to the Chief Whip. If an official of the committee is party to such a dispute, then such official shall not participate in the panel selection nor sit thereon.
Article V. COMMITTEES

Section A. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

Members: It will be made up of all elected members.
Functions:
- Setting organizational goals and objectives
- Developing and implementing strategic plans
- Reviewing and approving major decisions and policies
- Representing the organization in public forums and stakeholders
- Providing guidance and support to members
- Implementing members' decisions
- Overseeing organizational performance and progress
- Ensuring effective communication and collaboration
- Fostering a culture of accountability and transparency
Section B. FINANCE COMMITTEE

Members:
1. UWO Treasurer (Chairs)
2. UWO Vice Secretory (Finance Sec)
3. UWO Chairperson (Member)
Functions: Oversee all financial obligations of the Organization, and be called upon to provide guidance and direction on all financial matters. Treasurer is a mandatory member. At any time, the Treasurer and Finance Secretary offices shall not be changed during the same election.
Section C. WELFARE/HOSPITALITY/ EVENTS COMMITTEE

Members: Appointed by the executive.
Functions: To oversee all the social networking and provide guidance on requisite activities of the Organization. The Chairperson is a mandatory member.
Section D. CONSTITUTION/COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE

Members: Appointed by members.
Functions: Ensuring compliance with legal and regulatory requirements
Section E. BENEVOLENCE COMMITTEE

Members:
1. Benevolence Coordinator (Chairs)
2. UWO Treasurer
3. UWO Chairperson
Functions: To Oversee and coordinate all support, communication, and disbursement of funds in benevolence activities affecting members, as stated in Article 5 of Ushirika Bylaws.
Section F. PROJECTS COMMITTEE

Members:
1. UWO Vice Chairperson
2. Specific Project Coordinator
3. Project members appointed by Project coordinator.
Section G. ANY OTHER COMMITTEE AS MEMBERS MAY DEEM NECESSARY.

1. The Committees shall meet at such times and places as they determine but shall meet at least once every three months.
2. Shall consist of the elected members and shall hold office until the following annual general meeting.
3. Committees have the prerogative to set their own meetings' dates and Agendas, whose implementation MUST be ratified by members in a general meeting.
4. Other Committees shall be formed by preposition from any member, and a vote by all members present at a meeting. The proposing member will be primarily responsible for defining the proposed committee's function, but others may add to the definition of the function. A simple majority will affirm the creation of the proposed committee.
5. No spouses, siblings, or related members shall simultaneously be elected to committee leadership positions.
6. Committees formed under the Organization umbrella with distinction functions shall be governed by rules and regulations (Bylaws) as constituted by members of such committees.
7. Members of such committees shall select the leadership and define the terms under which they serve.
8. Members elected in a General Meeting with a clear mandate to oversee the functionalities of committees and in such areas as may be defined with a membership of at least 3 members, and one member must be an office bearer.
Article VI. MEETINGS

Section A. ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING (AGM)

The Annual General Meeting shall be held once in 12 calendar months on the 1st Sunday of March every year. The agenda for such a meeting shall consist of the following: -
- Confirmation of the minutes of the previous AGM
- Consideration of AUDITED Accounts
- Election of office bearers and the committee members
- Such other matters as the members may decide
- Any other business with the approval of the Chairperson
Section B. QUARTERLY GENERAL MEETING (QGM)

This is the usual planned quarterly meeting held on the first Sunday of March, the first Sunday of June, the first Sunday of September, and the first Sunday of December. At the chairperson's discretion, one of these meetings will be held virtually.
Section C. SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING (SGM)

1. Not less than two-thirds of the members may request this in writing to the secretary for a specific purpose. The SGM shall be held within 14 days from the date of requisition.
2. The leadership team may also call SGM for matters that they deem need to be discussed urgently by the membership.
3. Quorum for general meetings (AGM & SGM) shall not be less than 50% plus 1 of the registered members of the group. Two attempts will be made to meet the 60% threshold. On the second attempt, a simple majority shall suffice.
4. MEMBERS ABSENT WITH APOLOGIES ARE ALLOWED TO NAME PROXIES WHO WILL
VOTE ON THEIR BEHALF

Section D. OTHER MEETINGS

Other meetings, such as Committee Meetings and Leaders' Meetings, shall be held when deemed necessary, and their contents will be documented.
Section E. PROCEDURE FOR MEETINGS

1. At all meetings of the Organization, the Chairperson or, in his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, Or the Chief Whip, or in the absence of these officer's members shall elect any other member to chair the meeting.
2. The Chairperson may limit, at his discretion, the number of persons permitted to speak in favor of and against any motion.
3. Resolutions shall be decided by simple majority voting by show of hand. In the case of equality of votes, the Chairperson shall cast a vote to break the impasse.
Section F. ATTENDANCE

1. All members must conduct themselves in an orderly and responsible manner. The Chief Whip has to call to attention any cases of discipline.
2. All members are expected to be seated at the meeting venue at the specified time of the meeting, as announced in the call for meeting bulletin by the secretary. The formal session of the meetings shall last not more than 2 hours.
3. Fines shall be imposed as per Article 6 of Ushirika bylaws to any member who arrives after the established meeting starting time.
Article VII. ELECTIONS

1. The group elections shall be held for two years. The election mode shall be by secret ballot by an independent returning officer appointed by the executive committee.
2. All candidates will undergo vetting as stipulated in the bylaws.
3. Members will nominate themselves or other members of the association for election no less than 60 days before the AGM. The executive committee will vet the nominees and communicate the names of the qualified candidates to members no later than 30 days before the AGM.
4. Potential candidate must have been an association member for at least 2 years and not fallen out of good standing at any time during that period before elections.
5. Elected officials shall take office with immediate effect.
6. Outgoing officials must hand over office no later than a month after elections.
7. The Treasurer and Finance Secretary offices may not be changed at any time during the same election.
QUORUM

The majority of members in office immediately before an AGM shall constitute a quorum for the business transaction at that meeting. The executive committee shall not consider business at any meeting in which a quorum is not present.
- Positions
- Nomination
- Vetting
- Process/Procedure
Article VIII. COMPLIANCE

Section A. STATE TAX

We will file all state taxes according to Texas state tax requirements.
Section B. FEDERAL TAX

We will file annual federal tax returns according to IRS requirements.
Section C. FINANCIAL RECORDS

1. UWO shall maintain a bank account in accordance with the provision outlined in the Bylaws
2. The financial year shall commence in January to December
3. Budgets for each financial year shall be presented at the AGM.
4. We shall maintain the following financial reports,
i. Statement of Financial Position
ii. Statement of Financial Activity
iii. Benevolence of financial records
5. The books of accounts and all documents relating to that and a list of members of the Organization shall be available for inspection by UWO members with the secretariat officer. A member of the Organization shall give no less than fourteen (14) days notice in writing to the Secretary of the Organization.
6. Accounts shall be audited once a year BY AN EXTERNAL AUDITOR.
7. AT THE AGM MEMBERS SHALL
I. Appoint both External and/or Internal Auditors to audit the organization's financial records.
II. Approve payment for the External Auditor's services.
Section D. FUNDS USAGE

1. The funds of the Organization will be used for the following purposes:
- Assistance to the bereaved.
- Any other use as may be defined in a duly constituted meeting of the Association.
2. All money and funds shall be deposited in a bank or banks approved by members, and such deposit slips shall be submitted to the treasurer and/or any other authorized officer of the Organization during/or before the date of the scheduled meeting. The Treasurer and/ or any other authorized member may circulate the bank details to all members, and individual members may deposit such funds directly into such approved accounts.
3. Members shall have the power to vote and suspend any office bearer who it has reasonable cause to believe is not properly accounting for any of the funds or property of the Association and shall have the power to appoint another person in his place. Such suspension shall be reported to a special meeting to be convened on a date not later than 45 days from the date of such suspension, and the special meeting shall have full power to decide what further action should be taken in the matter.
Article IX. DISSOLUTION

1. The Association shall not be dissolved except by a resolution passed at a general meeting by a vote of two-thirds of the eligible members present and voting. No such resolution may be passed unless notice of the proposal has been given for a period of six months before the date of the meeting. If no quorum is obtained at such General Meeting, the meeting shall be adjourned to be held within one month. Notice of the general meeting shall be given to all members of the Organization at least 14 days before the date of the meeting. The quorum at the second meeting shall be the number of members present provided that one member shall not constitute quorum.
2. Any property of the Organization must be transferred, conveyed, applied, or distributed.
3. To complete the dissolution process, an official of the Organization must file a certificate of termination with the Texas Secretary of State.
Confirmed by:
- Chairperson: Name: Signature: Date:
- Secretary: Name: Signature: Date:
- Treasury: Name: Signature: Date:
